[From http://www.free-college-essays.com/American_History/7811-Revolutionary_War.html]

  Revolutionary War
  
  
When the British fell back from Concord to Boston in April 1775, the farmer militiamen of New 

England immediately besieged the city. The Second Continental Congress, meeting at Philadelphia in May

 1775 now took charge of the war and appointed Washington commander in chief. Before he arrived at 

Boston, the New Englanders had made a valiant attempt to hold Bunker Hill, preparatory to bombarding the

 British troops and fleet in the city.

            The first major battle of the American Revolution was fought at Bunker Hill in Massachusetts on

 June 17, 1775. Two months had passed since the skirmishes at Lexington and Concord. The British had 

increased their force in Boston and put General Howe in command. Thousands of colonial troops had

 gathered nearby. The American headquarters learned that Howe was planning to occupy some of the hills 

around Boston. To forestall him, Colonel Prescott was sent out on the night of June 16 to occupy Bunker 

Hill, on a small peninsula in the Charles River, north of the city. Prescott, however, occupied the adjoining

 Breed's Hill, close to the waterfront. 

            On the morning of June 17, the British were amazed to see trenches crowning Breed's Hill. The 

vessels in the harbor immediately began bombarding the fortification. Later in the day the British troops 

attacked it. Twice they advanced up the hill. General Putnam had given the command: "Don't fire until you 

can see the whites of their eyes." When the British were within a few yards of the fortifications a sheet of 

Flame swept down from the waiting Americans. The front ranks of charging British were mowed down. 

The others beat a hasty retreat. A third time the British charged. This time the Americans remained silent, 

For their powder was exhausted. The patriots fought with clubbed muskets, but they were slowly forced to

 Retreat to Bunker Hill, leaving the battlefield in the hands of the British. 

             It was a victory which had been dearly bought, however, for 226 British troops had been killed and 

828 wounded, while the loss of the Americans had been 145 killed and 304 wounded. General Nathaniel 

Greene said, "I wish we could sell them another hill at the same price." Today a granite shaft 221 feet

 (67 meters) tall stands near the spot where Maj. Gen. Joseph Warren fell just as the retreat began. Forced

 To retire by lack of powder, the Americans had given a demonstration of bravery and skill that left England

 Little cause for rejoicing. The New England militiamen, soon reinforced by Continental troops, held the city 

Beleaguered until the British commander, Lord Howe, moved his army to Nova Scotia in March of 1776. 

The British during the war, however, raided other New England towns.

            While Washington kept Howe bottled up in Boston, the Americans assumed the offensive to the west

 and north. In May 1775, Ethan Allen, leading his Green Mountain Boys and accompanied by General 

Arnold, captured Fort Ticonderoga, on the Lake Champlain waterway. Generals Philip Schuyler and Richard 

Montgomery, with 1,200 men, joined Allen at Fort Ticonderoga. On August 30 they marched northward 

toward Montreal. In September Montgomery laid siege to the Montreal defenses of Fort Chambly and Fort St. 

Johns. He captured the first in October. Fort St. Johns, with 400 men, fell into American hands in early 

November. Montreal was entered without further fighting on November 13.

             About the same time, General Arnold, with 1,000 volunteers, marched northwestward through the 

Maine wilderness toward Quebec. The hardships of the march so reduced his force that only 550 men

 reached the Quebec defenses. Montgomery came down the St. Lawrence with 450 men to aid the attack on 

Quebec. An attempt to storm the city on December 31 failed. Montgomery was killed at the start of the battle,

 and the Americans lost almost one third of their men. The Americans withdrew for the winter. By spring of 

1776, reinforcements increased the American force to about 1,000 men. These troops besieged Quebec in April

 and May. They withdrew upon learning that Gen. John Burgoyne, with 10,000 troops, was sailing up the 

             In July and August 1776 Howe's army was built up to a force of 32,000 men on Staten Island, in the

 New York harbor. In New York City and on Long Island, Washington had about 20,000 poorly armed men to 

oppose the British. Howe sent 20,000 men across the narrow channel from Staten Island to Long Island. 

On August 27 this force routed the Americans on Brooklyn Heights. The victorious British followed the 

Americans across the East River to Manhattan. Washington held Harlem Heights for a time but then retreated 

to White Plains. There, on October 28, Howe's superior forces drove back his army.Two American forts,

 Washington on the east bank and Lee on the Jersey shore, guarded against a British advance up the Hudson. 

But these forts fell quickly under British attack, and the British now held the entire New York City area. 

Howe was thus in a position to use the New York harbor as the chief British invasion port.

            In the final weeks of 1776 Washington retreated across New Jersey, his army a ragged remnant 

numbering only 3,000 men. But in defeat the army had learned the business of soldiering. On the Delaware 

Washington collected all available boats and crossed to Pennsylvania.While the hired Hessian troops

 celebrated Christmas night in Trenton, Washington ferried his weary men across the Delaware. The next

 morning he attacked. Colonel Johann Rall was killed, and almost 1,000 Hessians were captured. 

Washington then returned to the Pennsylvania bank.A few days later Washington again crossed to Trenton. 

Here his scanty force was reinforced by 3,600 men. General Cornwallis advanced to give battle. But the 

British general had divided his troops, and Washington quickly marched on to Princeton. On Jan. 3, 1777, 

he pounced upon the British left there. Washington then went into winter quarters at Morristown, and

 Cornwallis retired to New Brunswick.

            The British strategy for the 1777 campaign was to have Burgoyne march south and Howe north 

to a juncture on the Hudson. This move would isolate the New England states. During the winter of 1776-77, 

Burgoyne gathered his forces. In June Col. Barry St. Leger's diversionary force of Indians and British soldiers,

 numbering 1,600 men, sailed up the St. Lawrence to Lake Ontario. From Oswego, on the New York shore, 

St. Leger struck eastward toward Fort Schuyler. The British plan was to have St. Leger fight his way down

 the Mohawk Valley to a meeting with Burgoyne at Albany. At about the same time that St. Leger made his 

move, Burgoyne, with the main force of more than 7,500 men, headed south and surrounded Fort Ticonderoga.

 The Americans in the fort broke through the British lines and took refuge at the juncture of the Mohawk

            St. Leger was defeated at Oriskany. The Americans reinforced Fort Schuyler. St. Leger gave up

 his part of the British plan and retired to Montreal. On August 16 a Burgoyne foraging party was routed 

by American irregulars at Bennington, Vt. Burgoyne, lacking supplies and reinforcements, crossed the 

Hudson to a more secure position. Here he lost two battles at Freeman's Farm to an American force of 

17,000 under General Gates. On Oct. 17, 1777, Burgoyne surrendered his remaining force of about 5,800

 men at Saratoga. The second British attempt to split the states had failed.

             In the summer of 1777, instead of marching north to meet Burgoyne's southward thrust, as required

 by the British plan, Howe chose to take the American capital, Philadelphia. From New York City he sailed 

south to Chesapeake Bay and landed in Maryland. Washington's army, on Brandywine Creek, stood 

             On September 11 Howe made a sharp feint at Washington's front on the Brandywine. But the main 

British force circled north and flanked the Americans. Only darkness saved Washington from a complete 

defeat. He retreated to Chester, Pa. Several days later the Americans suffered another defeat at Paoli, Pa.,

 when a detachment under Gen. "Mad Anthony" Wayne was surprised . Several hundred Americans were 

killed under a British bayonet attack. The American Congress fled from Philadelphia to York, Pa., and 

Howe entered Philadelphia without opposition in late September.

            At Germantown, on October 4, the Americans seemed to have won a victory until the British made 

a determined stand in the Chew house. British reinforcements came up from Philadelphia while the

 besieged house still held out, and Washington's little army retreated. The Americans took up winter quarters 

             The winter that the Continental Army of 11,000 spent at Valley Forge was the darkest of the 

Revolution. Washington's men were without adequate food or shelter, and Congress was unable to relieve

 their plight. Hundreds of horses and oxen died of starvation. Men yoked themselves to draw the 

heavy wagons of provisions to their comrades. But there was never enough food. Some 3,000 men did not

 have shoes, and they protected their feet by wrappings of rags. The shelters were huts or wigwams of 

twisted boughs. During the winter many died and 2,000 deserted. 

            In Philadelphia, Sir Henry Clinton replaced Howe as the British commander. In the spring of 

1778 he learned that France was allied with the Americans. Clinton feared that a French fleet would enter

 the Delaware and cut him off from New York. In mid-June he began to march his army to New York.The

 British settled in New York and Washington camped at White Plains. France sent a fleet, some soldiers, 

and supplies to America. During the next two years there was little important fighting in the north and 

central colonies. A combined French and American attack on Newport failed. In 1779 Wayne defeated the

 British at Stony Point. But the theater of decisive fighting shifted to the South.

            Clinton and Cornwallis sailed south from New York and concentrated forces at Savannah. In May

 1780 they attacked Charleston, which Lincoln defended with 5,000 men. Charleston fell to this second 

British attack.General Gates hurriedly marched his force of more than 3,000 Americans down from North

 Carolina to give battle to Cornwallis' 2,300 men at Camden. The battle was fought on August 16 and 

Gates was beaten. He retreated to North Carolina, leaving the wounded Gen. Johann de Kalb to fall into 

British hands. De Kalb died a few days later .

             A band of frontiersmen under Isaac Shelby and John Sevier routed a British raiding party of 1,000 

regulars from a ridge of Kings Mountain, S.C. The British survivors fled in disorder. Swift American raids 

led by such leaders as Andrew Pickens, Francis Marion, the "Swamp Fox," and Thomas Sumter constantly

 harried the British forces .In December 1780 Gen. Nathanael Greene took command of American forces in

 the South. He divided his force and continued the "hit-and-run" war on Cornwallis. He sent Gen. Daniel 

Morgan with about 950 men to Cowpens, S.C. The British Col. Banastre Tarleton attacked Morgan there on

 Jan. 17, 1781. Morgan's force won an overwhelming victory.

            The American forces totaled about 4,500 men; the British, 2,200. The battle was fought on March 15. 

The Americans won a strategic victory, and Cornwallis, with more than 500 men killed or wounded, retreated to

 Wilmington, N.C. Greene marched into South Carolina and engaged the British at Hobkirk's Hill and at

Eutaw Springs.Cornwallis was reinforced, and in April he moved his army north. Lafayette was at Richmond,

 Va., in command of about 3,000 American troops. Cornwallis' reinforcements brought his strength up to about

 twice that number. He planned to trap Lafayette and defeat him. Lafayette retreated swiftly to the northwest,

 with Cornwallis on his heels. But the young Frenchman was too wily for the British general. Wayne, with 

about 1,000 men, came to strengthen Lafayette, and Cornwallis became fearful of being trapped himself. He 

turned eastward toward the sea to be near the British fleet.

             On August 30 De Grasse's fleet of 24 ships arrived off Yorktown. Cornwallis lay trapped between

 sea and ground enemies. An English fleet of 19 ships failed to rescue him. In September Rochambeau and

 Washington joined Lafayette. Their forces now totaled 16,000. Washington took command and began to

 close the trap. No real battle was fought, however. On October 19 Cornwallis' surrender of 7,247 men to

 Washington ended the war.Twice during the war England had tried to win back the Americans by offers 

of peace. Lord North and Parliament went so far in 1778 as to promise to yield on all points in the dispute. 

But it was then too late. After Congress had declared for freedom, its spokesmen took the stand that the 

United States was and must remain a separate nation. After the victory at Yorktown, Lord North resigned and 

a new ministry that was favorable to American independence came into power in England.

            Congress named a total of five commissioners:John Adams, John Jay, Franklin, Jefferson, and Henry 

Laurens,to make a treaty of peace. The conference took place in France. Jefferson did not attend, and Laurens

 reached Europe only two days before the preliminary treaties were signed. The commissioners were 

instructed not to make peace without the knowledge and consent of France, for joint action in closing the war 

was required by the French-American Treaty of Alliance (1778).

            The United States possessed a strong claim to the region. Before and during the Revolution, 

American settlements had been established in Kentucky and Tennessee. Virginia considered the Kentucky

 settlements one of its counties, and North Carolina held the same view of the Tennessee settlements.These 

lands were won for the United States by George Rogers Clark in 1778-79. Clark, a 25-year-old Virginian, 

had persuaded Patrick Henry, governor of Virginia, to authorize an expedition. During the summer of 1778

 Clark took the British posts of Vincennes, Cahokia, and Kaskaskia, where he negotiated treaties with the 

            In midwinter, Clark learned that the British governor at Detroit had marched southward and retaken

 Vincennes. Although the 180 miles that lay between Kaskaskia and Vincennes were covered with snow and ice, 

Clark gathered a small force and struck eastward. On Feb. 23, 1779, Clark's 130 men surrounded the British fort

 and opened fire. The British surrendered the next day.

            Fearing that Spain and France were ready to betray the United States, Adams and Jay outvoted Franklin

, decided to ignore the French alliance, and negotiated a preliminary peace treaty with England. Under the 

treaty, which was signed at Paris on Nov. 30, 1782, the Americans secured their independence and the land 

west to the Mississippi. Congress was to recommend that the states compensate the Loyalists for property taken

 from them during the war. No laws were to be passed to prevent the payment of debts owed by Americans to 

British merchants. The northern boundary was to include the line of the Great Lakes, and citizens of both the 

United States and Britain were to have the right to use the Mississippi. France accepted this treaty, made final 

on Sept. 3, 1783, by the Treaty of Paris. On the same day a peace was concluded between England and her 

             The American Revolution was a great social movement toward democracy and equality. Many

 Loyalists fled from the 13 states to Canada. There they strengthened the determination of the Canadians to

hold aloof from the United States. Vast estates of land had passed from the king, from colonial proprietors

 (in Pennsylvania and Maryland), and from Loyalists into the hands of the new state governments. Broken up

 into small tracts, these were sold at low cost or given to patriot soldiers. For a century thereafter, the United 

States was to be a nation of small farm owners, each enjoying the fruits of labor and recognizing no overlord 

save the government. The barriers to westward movement had been removed, and a flood of settlers poured

 into the lands beyond the mountains. State governments had been erected, and the first experiment in national 


    
    
Bibliography:

    