[From http://www.free-college-essays.com/American_History/7840-Robert_E_Lee.html]

  Robert E Lee
  
  
"There was not a man in the Confederacy whose influence with the whole people was as great as his." 1 These are words most commonly heard when someone is asked to remember Robert E Lee. Robert E. Lee was a great general who commanded the Confederate Army in the Civil War. Lee's family was the leading family of Virginia, and one of the most distinguished in the United States.   

   Robert was the fourth child of a Revolutionary War hero Henry "Light Horse Harry" Lee and Ann Hill Carter Lee. Robert was raised mostly by his mother. From her he learned patience, control, and discipline.  In contrast to the strong example of his mother Robert saw his father go from failed enterprise to failed enterprise. In part the young Robert was led to try harder and succeed. 

  Robert grew up with a great devotion to country life and to his native state, which continued throughout his life. On January. 19, 1807., Lee was born in Stratford Hall, near Montross, Va. Robert was a serious boy, and spent many hours in his father's library. In 1825 he entered the United States Military Academy at West Point, where his classmates admired him for his brilliance, leadership, and devotion to duty. In 1829, and he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Corps of Engineers. Robert E. Lee was a handsome man, 5 feet 10 1/2 inches tall and weigh about 170 pounds. He was always straight, alert, and intelligent. Robert was never known to smoke, drink alcoholic beverages, or use bad language. 

  Robert Lee married Mary Custis the granddaughter of George Washington. Lee served as an assistant in the chief engineer's office in Washington from 1834 to 183. Lee spent the summer of 1835 helping lay out the boundary line between Ohio and Michigan. His first important job came in 1837 when, he supervised the engineering work for St. Louis harbor and for the upper Mississippi and Missouri rivers. His work earned him a promotion to captain. In 1841 he was transferred to Fort Hamilton in New York harbor.

  In 1845 the War between U.S. and Mexico erupted. General Winfield Scott, overall U.S. Army commander, added Lee to the staff. Lee was instructed to map out the terrain ahead, dividing the line of advance for the U.S. troops, and at times he would have to lead troops to battle. Lee was learning skills he would need 16 years later. In Mexico Lee also met, worked with, and got a chance to evaluate many of those he would later serve with and against; James Longstreet, Thomas J. Jackson, George Pickett, and U.S. Grant. After the Mexican War Lee returned to service as an army engineer. He spent most of this time near Washington D.C. and moved into Custis mansion. 

  Early in the war, Lee supervised the construction of bridges for Wool's march toward the Mexican border. He then did excellent work on scouting trips. He was shortly transferred to General Winfield Scott's command and took part in the capture of Veracruz. During the march to Mexico City, Lee was promoted to brevet major, then to brevet lieutenant colonel. The official reports praised Lee. Scott declared that his "success in Mexico was largely due to the skill, valor, and undaunted courage of Robert E. Lee ... the greatest military genius in America." 2

  By 1855, Lee became a lieutenant colonel of cavalry and was assigned to duty on the Texas frontier. There he helped protect settlers from attacks by the Indians. Once again he proved to be an excellent soldier and organizer. But still these were not happy years for Lee. He really did not like to be away from his family for long periods of time. Lee tried to go home to see his wife as often as possible.

  Unlike many Southerners, Lee did not believe in slavery and did not favor secession. He felt that slavery had an evil effect on masters as well as slaves. Long before the war, he had freed the few slaves who he had inherited. Lee greatly admired George Washington, and hated the thought of a dividing the nation. But felt that his state was protecting the very liberty, freedom, and legal principles for which Washington had fought. Lee was willing to leave the Union. Lee had great difficulty deciding whether to stand by his native state or remain with the Union, even though Lincoln offered him the field command of the United States Army. Soon Lee wrote his sister: "... in my own person I had to meet the question whether I should take part against my native state. With all my devotion to the Union, and the feeling of loyalty and duty of an American citizen, I have not been able to make up my mind to raise my hand against my relatives, my children, my home. I have therefore resign!

ed my commission in the army, and, save in defense of my native state--with the sincere hope that my poor services may never be needed--I hope I may never be called upon to draw my sword." 3

  He had always felt that the "cordiality and friendship in the army was the great attraction of the service." 4 The break with General Scott, his commander in chief, was very difficult because they were close friends. 

  For a time after Lee joined the Confederate Army, he had no troops under his command.  In May 1861, Lee was appointed a full general. In the fall, he succeeded in stopping a threatened invasion from western Virginia. Later, he took charge of relieving the coast of South Carolina against invasion. When Lee returned to Richmond in 1862, he helped draw up plans for the Confederate forces in Virginia. The next day, Lee took command of Johnston's army, which he called the Army of  Northern Virginia. 

  From his first day of command, Lee faced an impossible task. Union General George B. McClellan had approached within 7 miles of Richmond with 100,000 men. Three forces were closing in on the Confederate troops of General Stonewall Jackson in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia. A fourth Union force was camped on the Rappahannock River, ready to aid McClellan. In a series of fights known as the Battles of the Seven Days, Lee forced McClellan to retreat. This campaign taught Lee the need for simpler methods and organization. Lee returned to Virginia to reorganize the Confederate army. 

  In a later battle general Ambrose Burnside led an attack against Lee in December 1862, at Fredericksburg, Va. It was this occasion that Lee made a famous statement. Fog covered the battlefield early in the morning before the battle began. As it lifted and the Confederate command surveyed the panorama of thousands of troops in full array, Lee remarked: "It is well that war is so terrible--we would grow too fond of it." 5

  Lee's troops badly defeated the Union forces. But Lee could not take advantage of his victory. The Northern troops had been very  cleverly placed. The Confederates had few reserves of men and supplies. Lee had to fight another defensive battle. 

The Confederate forces won a great victory, but paid a terrible price for it--the death of Stonewall Jackson, who was accidentally shot by his own men when he went ahead of his line of battle to scout. 

  Lee became a private citizen for the first time in 40 years. The application lacked a required oath of allegiance to the United States. Lee then signed an oath and sent it to Washington. This oath was lost, and Lee was not pardoned. A general amnesty of 1868 regained his right to vote. Lee still lacked the right to hold public office. In 1970, an employee of the National Archives found Lee's oath. In 1975, Congress restored Lee's full citizenship. 

Lee could have had many positions of wealth and prestige, but he chose to spend his last years as president of Washington College in Lexington, Virginia. He soon raised the small college to high levels of scholarship and made schools of commerce and journalism. Young men from all over the South went to "General Lee's school," which was named Washington and Lee University after he died. 

  Lee asked his students and his friends to try and keep the peace and accept the outcome of the Civil War. His attitude was very important at a time when bitterness and hatred swept over both the North and South. Instead of increasing this feeling, Lee opposed it, doing everything in his power to restore the political, economic, and social life of the South. "Make your sons Americans," he said. His health began to fail in 1870, and, after a brief illness, he died on Oct. 12, 1870. 

  People throughout the country felt his death as a personal loss. "I have met many of the great men of my time, but Lee alone impressed me with the feeling that I was in the presence of a man who was cast in a grander mold and made of different and finer metal than all other men. He is stamped upon my memory as a being apart and superior to all others in every way--a man with whom none I ever knew, and very few of whom I have read, were worthy to be classed." 6

  Lee is buried in the chapel he built on the campus in Lexington, along with other members of the Lee family. This chapel is sometimes called "The Shrine of the South" and is visited by thousands every year. In many southern states Lee‘s birthday anniversary is a legal holiday. Not only was Robert E. Lee a great general throughout his life but he is a hero in the eyes of many Americans.


    
    
Bibliography:

    